Manith Tûr by Gillian Brownson
Blasted from my side a stone child breaks the water like a finger of fossils in the flood,
holding back trouble, sea serpents and storms, cradled and battered in the mussels and the mud.
And horizon beyond, my great Wicklow sisters fasten to the crag of their land,
freeing the rain, falling on sails, driving through and stabbing in the sand.
Still they say goodbye, mortaithiae,
those the wonder, waving from the whirl of the water in the strum of the salt-green sea,
hauled in from island, the waves curling, hurling them home to me.
In a forest of masts, then of funnels, fishermen and, flying into morning,
past the anchored sun, floating the light of the sky and the sailors warning,
they sail by at gossai.
Tiny as darting stars they come, twinkling under oil and flame,
running on decks, hoisting up sails, cracking bottles against their boats name.
For centuries creaking through the murks of fogs over the toll of the boats wanes whistle,
washing over shipwrecked rocks, up here among gorse and heather and thistle,
I see Dumma V.
The messengers come rowing, the tugs towing, the scrolls of the captain's log,
or a missive of love, the treatise of kings from the pen of an old sea dog.
And some are shadows, below in the bones of ships,
dark words in an ancient hold, the letters bold,
deep for the divers, float there not read and not told.
The water at war, but the nunnae gov'yor,
I heard guns, not a foghorn, one morn,
the day's face in the cloud of a frown, the speed of a torpedo,
the crash of the hull, it came and it sang, blow the man down.
And an engine failed in my sky, in my eye, the jigs up went down to the deep.
Now I flower for them and the many laying here,
and soothe them in death's lonely sleep.
But above, the boats in the wind,
le da chi'n mynd? Tracing a track on the back of a monster,
a life anew for you? Dancing the jig to the horns of ships,
a scoused terrace with a different view?
Nei, aros yng Ngymru, odan ar awyr halen,
agwilywch yllonga gyda fi, ma eich mordaeth wedi bod yn hir,
naw linga hir, an meld to the sea.
Ports Past and Present is funded by the European Regional Development Fund
through the Ireland-Wales Cooperation Programme.